---
title: "Python Virtual Environment Explained Simply"
date: 2021-08-03T10:59:15-04:00
---
Python is a dynamic programming language that is getting more and more popular every year. More Universities and tech bootcamps are choosing it as a first programming language to teach to the beginners. In this article, I will explain an important concept you will come across once you past the “syntax learning” phase and want to build an application i.e.python virtual environment. I try to explain it in a simple way so that it’s easier to understand for people who are just starting out. This article is just a conceptual clarification without much codes included.

For the sake of this article, I would like you to imagine a house with one kitchen , two rest rooms, two bed rooms, a study room , a guest room and a living room. Each of these different parts of the house has it’s own purpose. Like, kitchen serves the purpose of being a place where one can prepare their food. Similarly, one can use living room as a hang out place; study room as a study place; bed room as a sleeping place etc, you got the point right ? Now, say if you want to install a new stove in your kitchen, would you install it in all of these rooms or just the place where you want to use it? It maybe different in some other parallel universe but in this universe, for normal humans we just like to install the stove in the kitchen, where we need it. Similarly, if one wants to add a new computer desk to the study room of the house, they want that just to be in the study room but not every rooms of the house.

Now, transfer the same concept to the computer applications we use. For every application, there are lot of building blocks and moving parts involved. Almost 100 percent of the time, when we are building an application, we need to install some packages/libraries so as to run our application smoothly. In macOS, if you need to use a library systemwide, there is Brew which helps you to install packages to your computer. This concept is similar to what chocolatey does in windows and apt does in linux. Likewise, when you are building a python application, you need to install different packages and dependencies. However, it is not logical to install those python packages system wide. And this is where the python virtual environment comes to help us. We use it to isolate our python application and install the dependencies we need, just inside our python application project folder. This also helps us in avoiding conflict between various python applications residing inside a same system.

For example, if you have an application that is using an older version of Flask and another application that is using a newer version of Flask, we want to create a python virtual environment for each of those applications and install those different versions of Flask to the respective folder of each of those projects. This way we will avoid the version conflict and just use the respective libraries where we need it.

There are two popular virtual environment tools for python i.e. 1. venv and 2. pipenv. The pipenv is the suggested way to manage the virtual environments and is a combination of pip and venv. If you want to learn more about pipenv, you can learn it from pipenv docs here.

Thank you for reading. I hope that was helpful for you. Happy Coding!
